
Read-me file for the SSB 7.0 example programs for handling missing data and 
	accounting for sample design uncertainty

Created by Evan Totty
Last updated: November 2, 2018


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUMMARY:

The programs herein provide examples of how to address missing data and how to 
	generate replicate weights in the SSB 7.0. These example programs are 
	applied to two different applications. 

The missing data methods include sequential regression multivariate imputation 
	("SRMI", via software program IVEware) and raking (based on the available 
	cases, but bringing the marginal population totals back into agreement 
	with national totals). [Available case analysis without any raking 
	adjustments constitutes a third option for handling missing data that 
	is shown in the example applications, but is performed automatically 
	in SAS and Stata.]

The replicate weights can be used instead of standard asymptotic formulas to 
	construct standard errors. This method may be more accurate, particularly 
	when the survey design is stratified according various socio-economic and 
	geographic characteristics; these sampling designs can be incorporated 
	into the replicate weights, but are not accounted for in standard variance 
	formulas.

IVEware is a software program developed by researchers at the Survey Methodology
	Program, Survey Research Center, Institute for Social Research, 
	University of Michigan. The software can perform, among other things, 
	multiple imputation of missing data using SRMI (also known as Chained 
	Equations). IVEware comes with a set of software programs that can 
	perform SRMI given a set of input data and modeling instructions. In the 
	applications described below, a user program specifies the input data 
	to be imputed, specifies the model settings, then calls the IVEware 
	software on the server and finally extracts the imputed datasets. More 
	information on IVEware can be found here: 
	https://www.src.isr.umich.edu/software/

The two applications are (1) life-cycle earnings profiles, and (2) time between 
	disability onset and SSDI adjudication separately by gender. 

Application (1) is performed by regressing log annual earnings on age indicators 
	for individuals in the 1990-2008 SIPP panels who have positive earnings 
	every year from age 25 to 60. Survey weights are adjusted across SIPP 
	panels based on the relative size of each panel within the sample. 

Application (2) regresses adjudication wait time (in months) on gender indicators 
	for individuals in the 1996 SIPP panel.

Example programs for these methods and both applications are written in both 
	SAS and Stata. The instructions below are the same for both the SAS 
	and Stata programs, except where specified.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
DIRECTORY LAYOUT:

From this location, there are two folders: 
	1. "base_programs” - includes the programs written to perform SRMI, raking, 
		and generate replicate weights. These programs are written to be 
		called by a  master program when they are applied to a given 
		application. Each program is described in more detail below.
	2. “applications” - shows the base SRMI/raking/replicate weight programs 
		applied to the two applications described above, including programs 
		used to perform the analysis for the applications. 



The “base_programs” folder includes five SAS and five Stata programs that perform functions 
	related to imputation, raking, and generating replicate weights. These programs 
	are written to be used with a master program that has already pulled the desired 
	sample and variables from the SSB and saved them as named in the base 
	programs. 

	1. srmi.sas/do – (WILL need to be edited by user) This program uses the 
		IVEware functionality to impute missing data in the sample/variables 
		of interest. Step 1 in the program specifies the imputation data and 
		model settings. The user will need to edit these settings according 
		to their sample and desired settings. Step 3 includes specifying 
		post-imputation relationships between variables and will also need to 
		be edited by the user.
		***1b. imputeSSB.set - For the Stata programs, an additional 
			imputeSSB.set program is required, which specifies the 
			imputation settings and is called by srmi.do. In SAS, 
			these settings are specified within srmi.sas.
	2. raking.sas/do – This program rakes the initwgt variable and replicate weights, 
		such that the marginal weighted totals for the available case sample are 
		in alignment with marginal totals from a control population dataset. Note, 
		if the user wants to rake some individuals in a given sample to marginal totals at 
		different points in time (e.g., individuals from different SIPP 
		panels), then the program should be called separately for each panel.
	3. prepPopControlTotals.sas/do – This program takes a dataset on population totals 
		and prepares it for use in the raking program.* This involves creating 
		marginal population totals for various state/sex/race/Hispanic origin/age  
		categories.** Note that the raking.sas program constructs the same 
		marginal population totals for the weighted SSB sample.
	4. genRepWeights.sas/do – This program generates replicate weights for the given sample, 
		based on the initwgt, halfsamp, and varstrat variables in the SSB data.
	5. genRepWeightsSRMI.sas/do – This program does the same thing as the above program, 
		except it is designed for use with srmi.sas/srmi.do such that it loops through 
		the completed implicates for a given synthetic file and generates the 
		replicate weights for each completed implicate.



The “applications” folder includes a sub-folder for each of the two applications 
	described above. Within the folder for each application, there is a sub-folder 
	for the SAS versus Stata programs and then another sub-folder for each approach: 

	1. "available_case" - includes the programs used to estimate the results 
		using the available-case approach (with and without raking 
		adjustments)
	2. "impute" - includes the programs used to estimate the results based on 
		handling missing data via Sequential Regression Multiple Imputation (SRMI) 
		via IVEware

	Within the folder associated with a given approach are the necessary base programs 
		described above, tailored to the particular application, and a 
		master program and analysis program. The master program 
		specifies the relevant settings, prepares the data, and calls the base 
		programs. The analysis program performs the analysis for the given application.



---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
USING THE PROGRAMS:

As described above, the imputation/raking/replicate weight programs are intended to be used 
	with a master program. The master program as written in the example applications 
	loops through the synthetic replicates and keeps the sample and variables of interest 
	for the analysis. It then calls the subsequent imputation/raking/replicate weight 
	programs.

The example application programs are grouped into two cases: imputation vs available case 
	analysis (with or without raking). 
	- For the imputation case, the master program proceeds as follows:
		1. (For a given synthetic replicate) Keep the sample and variables of 
			interest from the full synthetic replicate and save as a new dataset.
		2. Send the data into the srmi.sas program, which multiply imputes the 
			missing values on the dataset, generating [# of multipes] imputed files 
			for each synthetic dataset ([# of multiples] is specified in the srmi.sas program).
		3. Send the imputed dataset into the genRepweightsSRMI.sas program, which 
			generates replicate weights and attaches them to each dataset.
		4. Repeat for all 4 synthetic replicates, generating 4*[# of multiples] 
			total datasets for analysis.
	- For the available case, the master program proceeds as follows:
		1. Run the prepPopControlTotals.sas program, which prepares the population 
			control dataset for use in the raking program.
		2. (For a given synthetic replicate) Keep the sample and variables of interest 
			from the full synthetic replicate, drop individuals with missing data 
			for the variables of interest, and save as a new
			dataset.
		3. Send the data into the genRepweights.sas program, which generates 
			replicate weights and attaches them to the dataset.
		4. Send the file into the raking program, which rakes both the initwgt 
			variable and the replicate weights.
		5. Repeat for all 4 synthetic replicates, generating 4 datasets for analysis.

The output from the master program is a set of completed data implicates (if 
	missing values are imputed via SRMI) based on the four synthetic 
	datasets or a set of available-case observation datasets (with raked and 
	non-raked weights) based on the four synthetic datasets.

Finally, analysis is performed in the "analysis_XXXX" programs, which prepare 
	data for the regressions, peform the regressions and save the results 
	on each implicate, combine the results across implicates and round the 
	results, and then graph the final results.








* The applications described above used U.S. population data from the Survey of 
	Epidemiology and End Results (SEER), provided on the website of the National 
	Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Users may use the same SEER dataset available 
	on the NBER website that was used for the analysis below: “usrace19agesadj.sas7bdat,” 
	which corresponds to the “All States Combined (Adjusted) – County – 19 Age Groups – 
	1990- - 4 Expanded Races by Origin” dataset on the NBER website. If users do choose 
	to use this dataset along with the “prepPopControlTotals.sas” and “raking.sas” 
	programs to rake to a post-1989 U.S. population total, then the user only needs to 
	specify the year to which the weights will be raked within the master program. 

	The data is located here: 
	http://data.nber.org/data/seer_u.s._county_population_data.html. It includes annual 
	U.S. population data by state/sex/race/Hispanic origin/age beginning in 1990 and 
	provides all of the detail needed to run the raking program provided. If users need 
	to rake weights to match pre-1990 U.S. population data, they will need to either 
	find population data stratified by each of these categories elsewhere and adjust 
	the variable names in the “prepPopControlTotals.sas” program accordingly or use 
	the available SEER data without Hispanic origin for earlier years and adjust the 
	“prepPopControlTotals.sas” and “raking.sas” programs accordingly. 

** The raking program was written to be similar to the raking programs used for creating 
	the original SIPP weights. Thus, choices such as which variables, variable values, 
	and cross-classifications to use for constructing the marginal totals to which the 
	base weights are raked were largely based on similarity to SIPP programs, 
	availability of SIPP variables in the SSB, and availability of U.S. population 
	data for the necessary cross-classifications.  
